---
templateKey: blog-post
title: Calculating risk of exposure to COVID 19 in large gatherings
date: 2020-06-16T22:41:50.550Z
description: Calculating risk of exposure to COVID 19 in large gatherings
featuredpost: true
featuredimage: /img/products-full-width.jpg
tags:
  - coronavirus
  - risk
---
As the United States begins to reopen businesses, offices, and public places following stay-at-home orders, uncertainty remains around the level of risk associated with returning to our normal lives.

Even discussing various events can feel controversial because the level of risk is unknown, and everyone has their own subjective view on how much risk is acceptable to them. This uncertainty continues to contribute to the COVID 19 fatigue that I continue to feel all around me. I have had numerous discussions both personally and professionally around childcare options, getting a haircut, returning to the workplace, meeting up with friends and neighbors, attending weddings, etc. How risky are any of these events? 

Fortunately, probability and statistics can help us quantify these risks, and I can help explain the calculations and assumptions I will make, both technical and non-technical. Note that as I discuss risk, I am defining risk as the probability of being exposed to COVID-19.

Let’s start with the simplest case. You want to meet up with 1 friend today. To estimate this level of risk, we have to estimate the probability the friend is currently infected with COVID-19. This seems simple enough. We have data on the number of new cases in our area, and we can make a couple of assumptions along the way to create this estimate.

Data is readily available on the number of new cases reported by state by day. I have found covidtracking.com to be the easiest way to collect and download this data. I live in Pennsylvania, so I collected my state’s data from this website. I know the daily case counts may be somewhat imperfect, so I decided to average the number of new cases over the past 7 days to calculate the reported number of daily new cases in Pennsylvania. This estimate tells me how many new cases were reported, but we also know that COVID-19 is infectious for some amount of time. In other words, the new cases reported today will be infectious today and for some period of time after; Similarly, the cases reported today were likely infectious before they were tested as well. The parameter we need to calculate (average length of a COVID-19 infection) is difficult to estimate. For my calculation, I decided to use 7 days as the approximate amount of time that COVID-19 is infectious. This estimate is purely based on a ‘gut estimate’, which roughly means that I made it up, and it feels about right based on the research I have done. Nearly all of the research I have read doesn’t come to a sound conclusion on the exact number of days anyone is infectious, so I will stick with my gut estimate for now and create my calculations in a dynamic way that can be easily updated as new information and data become available. There is one other parameter that is challenging to estimate – the proportion of people who are tested compared to the proportion of people who have COVID-19. Research indicates that there may be a large number of people who have COVID-19 and are asymptomatic but still infectious. Calculating this proportion is extremely challenging, so I am using another gut estimate of 50%. This feels about right to me, and we can continue to update this parameter as more data becomes available. The last parameter in the calculation is simply Pennsylvania’s population, which I can readily collect from US census data. The table below summarizes all of these parameters and my calculation methods. I highlighted in green the parameters that are straight forward to estimate, and I highlighted in yellow the parameters that are difficult to estimate. The result is that right now, approximately 0.076% of the population in Pennsylvania is infected with COVID-19.

Therefore, I can estimate that meeting up with my 1 friend today has about a 0.076% chance of exposure to COVID-19. Now, what if I want to meet up with 2 friends today? How do I calculate that risk? Well, I can be exposed to COVID-19 if friend A has COVID-19 & friend B does not, if friend B has COVID-19 & friend A does not, or if both friend A and friend B have COVID-19. Actually, it’s easier to think about this the opposite way – I will not be exposed to COVID-19 if and only if neither of my 2 friends has COVID-19, which I can calculate as Probability Friend A does not have COVID-19 times Probability Friend B does not have COVID-19 (99.924% x 99.924%) = 99.48%, and therefore my risk of exposure is 100% - 99.48% = 0.15%. This can then be further extrapolated to any size group – your risk of exposure is 100% - Probability that nobody in the group has COVID-19. I created this formula in Excel and calculated the risk all the way out to a potential gathering of 2000 people. For comparison purposes, I also ran the numbers for New York state, to see how much higher the risk is in a state that has been hit much more heavily by the virus. The results are summarized in the graph below. If I were to attend a wedding with 200 fellow Pennsylvanians, my risk of exposure would be about 14% (vs NY at 17%). I get to a 50% risk of exposure with a gathering of 911 people (vs. NY at 732).

If your initial reaction is that the risk seems low, let me remind you that these calculations are assessing risk for any one event at one time. If I were to attend 10 weddings, each with 100 people, my risk of exposure for any 1 wedding is 7.3%. My risk of exposure across all 10 weddings is 53%. Public health officials have the incredibly difficult job of assessing risk on a very different scale than me individually calculating my own risk. We are all personally responsible for our own well-being as well as the well-being of everyone in our community. I strongly encourage everyone to follow the guidance of their public health officials. You can access the official CDC guidance here.

All calculations and data are available in this Google Sheet. Feel free to use this to calculate risk, and you may even update the parameter estimates and see how the result changes – you will have to download or copy the sheet to update the parameters.